# Chapter 7. Making Our Own Types and Type Classes

## Data keyword

    data Bool = False | True

The part before the equal sign denotes the type, which in this case is Bool.

When declaring a data type, the part before the = is the type constructor, and
the constructors after it (possibly separated by | characters) are value
constructors.

The value constructors specify the different values that this type can have. So
we can do

    data Shape = Circle Float Float Float | Rectangle Float Float Float Float

where the three floats of the circle define its center and radius, and the four
floats of the rectangle define its corners.

Circle and Rectangle here are called value constructors.

    > :t Circle
    Circle :: Float -> Float -> Float -> Shape

Note circle is not a type, any more than True is. Shape is a type. Here's a
kind of polymorphic function:

    area :: Shape -> Float
    area (Circle _ _ r) = pi * r ^ 2
    area (Rectangle x1 y1 x2 y2) = (abs $ x2 - x1) * (abs $ y2 - y1)

If we try to just print out Circle 10 20 5 from the prompt, we’ll get an error.
That’s because Haskell doesn’t know how to display our data type as a string.
We need to make the Shape type part of the Show class, like this:

    data Shape = Circle Float Float Float | Rectangle Float Float Float Float
         deriving (Show)

Then this works

    > Circle 10 20 5
    Circle 10.0 20.0 5.0

Let's make the points in shapes a type

    data Point = Point Float Float deriving (Show)
    data Shape = Circle Point Float | Rectangle Point Point deriving (Show)

Notice that when defining a point, we used the same name for the data type and
the value constructor. This has no special meaning, although it’s common if
there’s only one value constructor. 

If we put all this in a module we can export it like this

    module Shapes
    ( Point(..)
    , Shape(..)
    , area
    ) where

The `Shape(..)` stuff exports all the constructors of a type. It's the same as
writing `Shape (Rectangle, Circle)` but shorter. We don't have to do this if we
want to hide the ability to use these constructors.

## Records

These are like data types but with named fields, e.g.

    data Person = Person { firstName :: String
                         , lastName :: String
                         , age :: Int
                         , height :: Float
                         , phoneNumber :: String
                         , flavor :: String } deriving (Show)

The main benefit of using this syntax is that it creates functions that look up
fields in the data type. By using record syntax to create this data type,
Haskell automatically makes these functions: firstName, lastName, age, height,
phoneNumber, and flavor.

Apparently this means you can't have record types with fields with the same
name?!

## Type parameters

E.g. Circle and Rectangle return a value of type Shape.

    data Shape = Circle Float Float Float | Rectangle Float Float Float Float

But if the data keyword is followed by a name and a type parameter, the name is
a type constructor, not a value constructor, e.g.

    data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a

Here a is a type parameter. `Maybe` alone is not a type. `a` must be a
particular type, that is the type that values of this type can take when
they're not Nothing.

Types like `Shape` or `Maybe Int` are concrete types. All values have a
concrete type.

We usually use type parameters when the type that’s contained inside the data
type’s various value constructors isn’t really that important for the type to
work.

## Vector type
    
We don’t put type constraints into data declarations, even if it seems to make
sense. You’ll need to put them into the function type declarations either way.
So:

```
data Vector a = Vector a a a deriving (Show)

vplus :: (Num a) => Vector a -> Vector a -> Vector a
(Vector i j k) `vplus` (Vector l m n) = Vector (i+l) (j+m) (k+n)

dotProd :: (Num a) => Vector a -> Vector a -> a
(Vector i j k) `dotProd` (Vector l m n) = i*l + j*m + k*n

vmult :: (Num a) => Vector a -> a -> Vector a
(Vector i j k) `vmult` m = Vector (i*m) (j*m) (k*m)
```

## Type classes

If a data type derives from a type class, Haskell is able to fill in some of
the behavior. E.g. for a record

    data Person = Person { firstName :: String
                         , lastName :: String
                         , age :: Int
                         } deriving (Eq)

two variables of type Person while be equal if they were build with the same
value constructor (in this case there is only one), and the comparing each of
the fields. The fields must be part of `Eq` for this to work, which `String` and
`Int` are.

Deriving `Read` and `Show` do what you'd expect (make it possible to read a
variable of this type from a string, or write a variable of this type as a
string).

Deriving `Ord` gives you a type in which variables dervied from the different
value constructors have an ordering, e.g.

    > data Bool = False | True deriving (Ord)
    > True > False
    True

For this reason `Nothing` is less than all `Just` values.

Types deriving `Bounded` support `maxBound` and `minBound`, e.g.

    > data Day = Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | Thursday | Friday | Saturday | Sunday
                  deriving (Eq, Ord, Show, Read, Bounded, Enum)
    > minBound :: Day
    Monday

Types deriving `Enum` support `succ` and `..`

    > [Thursday .. Sunday]
    [Thursday,Friday,Saturday,Sunday]

## Synonyms

`String` and `[Char]` are synonyms. That is implemented with

    type String = [Char]

They don't really do anything except provide more descriptive names to people
reading the code, e.g.

    type PhoneNumber = String
    type Name = String
    type PhoneBook = [(Name, PhoneNumber)]

Note that `type` is for declaring synonyms, not types!

Synonyms can have type parameters, e.g.

    type AssocList k v = [(k, v)]

`AssocList` is a type constructor that takes two types and produces a concrete
type—for instance, `AssocList Int String`.

You can partially apply type parameters, e.g.

    type IntMap v = Map Int v

is equivalent to

    type IntMap = Map Int

Either way, the IntMap type constructor takes one parameter, and that is the
type of what the integers will point to.

Type synonyms (and types generally) can be used only in the type portion of
Haskell. Haskell’s type portion includes data and type declarations, as well as
after a :: in type declarations or type annotations.

## Either, Left, Right

Another cool data type that takes two types as its parameters is the Either a b
type. This is roughly how it’s defined:

    data Either a b = Left a | Right b deriving (Eq, Ord, Read, Show)

Kind of like `Nothing` has type `Maybe a`, `Left True` has type `Either Bool b`

`Maybe`s are conventionally used as the return value of functions that can fail
in one way (in which case `Nothing` indicates that failure).

But if the function can fail in several ways, or information about the nature
of the failure is useful to the caller, `Either a b` is used. 

In this case, by convention, `a` is a type that can tell us something about the
possible failure, and `b` is the type of a successful computation. Hence,
errors use the Left value constructor, and results use Right.

For example: Each locker has a code combination. When students need to be
assigned a locker, they tell the locker supervisor which locker number they
want, and he gives them the code. However, if someone is already using that
locker, the student needs to pick a different one. Set up some types:

    import qualified Data.Map as Map

    data LockerState = Taken | Free deriving (Show, Eq)

    type Code = String

    type LockerMap = Map.Map Int (LockerState, Code)

Next, we’ll make a function that searches for the code in a locker map. We’ll
use an `Either String Code` type to represent our result, because our lookup
can fail in two ways: The locker can be taken, in which case we can’t tell the
code, or the locker number might not exist. If the lookup fails, we’re just
going to use a String to indicate what happened.

    lockerLookup :: Int -> LockerMap -> Either String Code
    lockerLookup lockerNumber map = case Map.lookup lockerNumber map of
        Nothing -> Left $ "Locker " ++ show lockerNumber ++ " doesn't exist!"
        Just (state, code) -> if state /= Taken
                                then Right code
                                else Left $ "Locker " ++ show lockerNumber
                                            ++ " is already taken!"

## Recursive data structures
